We always have options and it’s important to be
able to recognize as many options as possible and then naturally decide for ourselves which option
suits us best.

no matter how shy or confident you are
now, you can improve and become more confident.

People attributed my inaction and unwillingness to initiate activities
with others as being antisocial, aloof, indecisive, reactive, and generally unfriendly. What I found
most painful was that I wanted to be social, proactive, decisive, and friendly only at that time I did
not know how. That was the most frustrating part was being as if I were trapped in a shell and
unable to be who I really was all along.

By doing these exercises, you will gain the
confidence that you seek. After you get the confidence you want, you’ll be able to look back on this
as the starting point of your confident journey with life as an amazing adventure.

I had two choices. I could either retreat back to my comfort zone and be shy, blaming someone else
for making me that way. Or I could take responsibility and go for it. When my confidence really
grew, I got to the point where I could meet women and gain instant rapport with them, conversing
with them at ease.

We all have a comfort zone, a set of things we feel comfortable doing. It varies in each area of our
lives

Our challenge is to perpetually expand this comfort
zone, doing new and different things. This means that we are evolving and growing.

The beauty of
expanding your comfort zone is that there is a certain rush when you do it. There is this surge of
energy, this rush you feel when you do something new. You feel really alive.

This rush of vitality in expanding your comfort zone can be addictive! 


if people can make addictions in the
negative sense, what stops us from becoming positively addicted?

It’s a revelation to understand that
you can aim your addictions in the right direction. What if you were to aim your addictions to
health, vitality, achieving goals, and expanding your comfort zone?

You could say that becoming
addicted to stepping outside your comfort zone is what life is about. Growing. Changing. Evolving.

Are you confident? Are you shy? Are you tentative? They say, “That’s just the
way I am.” They need to stop saying that. It’s as if they are chanting a negatively reinforcing
mantra. The real secret is that it’s a dirty rotten broken affirmation that keeps people stuck.

The
affirmation “every day and every way I’m getting better and better” is a famous affirmation by Emile
Coue, an early-self help pioneer.

“I’m shy because that’s the way I am,” will work as an affirmation
also if people repeat it. If others repeat this phrase, append to their statement, “They are shy because
that’s just the way they are according to them”.

Believing that your parents were shy which caused you to be shy is no excuse. Same goes for your
kids. People do not become shy automatically when they are born. There is no ‘shyness gene’. Shy
people can’t blame their genes.

People become shy because they’ve learned to behave and act in a
certain way. When I was shy around people, it’s because I was in the habit of looking at a person,
saying inside my mind, “He/she won’t like me,” and then feeling bad inside, picturing him/her
rejecting me, and then feeling immense fear that paralyzed me. That was simply the way I learned to
behave

Kids unconsciously
pick up the behaviors of the parents. Your parents may have influenced you to be shy, but that’s
different from them inflicting you with some untreatable genetic disease, which is really what it
really means when people say, “That’s just the way I am!”

Shy is
not a trait; it’s only a way of acting. If you can act one way that means you can act another way too.

Shy is a behavior; it’s not an adjective that describes a person. It’s not a state of being. It’s a way of
acting.

You can behave in a confident manner too. You always have that choice. People locked into
the “I’m shy” method don’t realize they have the choice.

Consider this: if you could choose your identity, if you could choose the way you see yourself, then
would you deliberately label yourself as shy? As a person lacking confidence? As hesitant or
introverted or anything less than glorious? Absolutely not. And yet, that ’s unfortunately what so
many people do when they say, “I’m shy, I’m just not confident,” or anything else of that nature. Therefore, it’s important to avoid the phrase, “I’m shy.”

Few people realize that we have all the resources we need to
behave in a confident manner, and as this realization sinks in to you now, you can feel really good,
knowing how radically you will change yourself.

You can choose to behave in a confident manner.

In the case of confidence, it’s useful to think of confidence as contagious and infectious. The
confidence bug can bite you. It may not be absolutely true yet it’s useful to believe.

n fact, this
book contains a very potent species of confidence bugs and they will bite you all throughout this
book. There is a powerful frame of mind at work here:
It’s the “as if” frame.

If you act as if something is real for long enough, you will eventually forget that you are only
pretending and however you are acting will become your habit.

People who used to be shy have
used this ”as if” frame of mind to develop their confidence. The difference between people who are
confidence and those who are shy are their habits

Habits can either be good or bad. The secret is to have good habits. The more empowering habits
you have, the better your life will be.

Developing these habits of behaving confidently is enjoyable
too. It’s exciting to witness your personal transformation as you gain more confidence in yourself.

The mind and body are part of a cybernetic system. This means that the body influences the mind
and the mind influences the body.

We can pretend to have confidence by reliving confident
experiences in our mind and our body will adopt confident physiology. Or if we choose to adopt 
confident physiology, our mind will adjust what you are seeing, hearing, and feeling internally to
experience confidence. 

We can use this to our advantage. You can pretend anything and master it.

You can pretend to have confidence and pretty soon
you’ll forget that you’re pretending and by the time you’ve done that, your habit confidence is a
habit.

Following that, your confidence gets ingrained into you as a person when you think about
yourself as a confident person.

Pretend that you have the
confidence before you really do have it. If you were to be ten times more confident than you are
now, answer the following questions:
How would you be moving differently right now?
How would your body posture be different right now?
How would you be talking to yourself inside differently right now?
How would you be speaking to others right now?
What you see inside your mind to instantly make you ten times more confident right now?
What you hear inside your mind to instantly make you ten times more confident right now?
What kind of confident feeling in your body would you experience?
Where in your body would you feel that confidence first?
How could you intensify that confident feeling in your body?

In answering the questions and doing what the questions presuppose you will do, your unstoppable
confidence will soar.

When your confidence soars, forget that you’re pretending and follow through
on taking action to do whatever you need to get done.

I’ve used this technique a lot when I first learned how to walk up and begin talking to strangers. I
would ask myself all of the questions listed above and then answer them one by one. With each
question I answered, I adjusted my behavior to pretend as if I already had the confidence I was
seeking. And after I had finished answering all the questions, I actually could feel unstoppable confidence within me. This propelled me to go introduce myself to some strangers and begin talking
to them.

The reverse is also true so be forewarned about that. If you think about shyness and adopt shy body
language, your mind and body will make you feel shy. If you catch yourself doing this, acknowledge
it, and then begin asking yourself the confidence questions designed to get you into a super confident
state.

Confident and shy body language (physiology) differ greatly.

Having shy body language means
hanging your head as if you’re ashamed of yourself, slump your shoulders forward, having a droopy
back instead of standing up straight, and looking down to the ground

Having confident body
language means keeping your head held high, your shoulders back, your abdominal muscles tucked
in, standing up tall and proud.

By realizing the difference, you can be sure to maintain confident
body language as you have unstoppable confidence.

Most people I meet are living what I term “accidental lifestyles”. They allow external influences and
circumstances to randomly lead them to whatever lifestyle they are living.

People who are living the lives of
their dreams are doing that by design. It does not happen accidentally, you have to make it happen.

Realize that you and only you have complete control over your own thoughts.

Any emotion that you
experience that causes you to take action or that keeps you incapacitated is an emotion that you have
given power.

People are not helpless automatons floating through space responding to everything
without any choices. You can choose which emotions to give power to, and which to leave behind.

Lack of confidence comes from a number of areas: society, parents, schools, and the media.

In many ways, society conditions people to “go with the flow”, to “accept what is offered”, and
“don’t make any waves ”.

Sometimes, this is falsely interpreted by some as advice to NOT follow
their dreams. If you need to step outside of what is normal and usual to pursue your dreams, then do
exactly that.

Parents can be major contributors to a lack of confidence. Parents often try to get kids to conform to the view of what they think is correct. 

Parents always have a positive intention motivating their every behavior yet sometimes they don’t
always communicate that.

How
does school create a lack of confidence? One factor is peer pressure.

A research study in the 1960’s showed how powerfully expectation influences performance.

In fact, as a child, when we are born, we enter this world with only two natural fears.
	1. The fear of falling
	2. The fear of loud noises

Aside from the fear of falling and the fear of loud noises, all other fears are learned

Human beings
are magnificent at learning and because you have learned to fear other things aside from the only two
natural fears, you can naturally empower yourself to move past your fear by learning new ways of
behaving.

Fear can be characterized by the acronym F.E.A.R. meaning False Evidence
Appearing Real.

A study was conducted among adults to research what was their greatest fear and the fear of public
speaking rated higher than the fear of death.

Being
more afraid of public speaking than death is a direct result of learning to fear something that does not
need to be feared.

When people realize that public speaking is simply a process and not a life or death
event, the false evidence disappears and with it goes the fear. With the fear gone, people can be their
naturally confident selves.

Children are already in their natural
state of being absolutely confident, full of wonder, and ready to explore the world around them.
What if we were to adopt that same child-like attitude for going after what we wanted in the world?


see others around me doing it and I know I can do it too. I’m going to persevere. It doesn’t matter
how many times I fall down. It only matters that I keep getting up.”

They crawl around, stand up, wobble around, fall down and then do it all
over again. Kids continue doing this until they learn how to consistently walk. Nothing will stop
them from learning how to walk.

When you have this same attitude in going after your goals,
nothing will stop you from achieving them.

Sometimes being overly sensitive in terms of feelings can lead to shyness.

People can become afraid
of doing anything for fear of offending someone, hurting someone else’s feelings, or getting in
trouble.

Being supersensitive may be useful in some contexts such as when you want to really
empathize with a person yet if a person is supersensitive all the time then that is detrimental.

It’s important to be sensitive to a point yet you need to have confidence to do what it takes to achieve
your outcome at the same time.

People are remarkably resilient. If you have confidence and
accidentally hurt someone’s feelings, there’s a very simple remedy. You apologize, resolve not to do
that again, and move on. It’s really very simple.

Confidence is not a thing. By calling something confidence, it’s actually a misnomer.

There is only such thing as acting confident or behaving in a confident way.

Someone who behaves in a confident manner
is said to have confidence. Someone who behaves in a tentative manner is said to lack confidence.

And confidence is context dependent. Confidence isn’t pervasive everywhere in all facets. You
don’t catch it like a disease. It’s simply a process that you do inside your mind.

The same goes for any emotion, be it fear, sadness, depression or anxiety. None of these are actual
‘things’. They are the result of processes, sequences of thought that you run in your mind.

Up until
now, you may not have been aware of that you were doing this, and the vital thing to realize is that
you have complete control over these processes.

You can decide which mental processes have use
and which do not, and if they are useless, you can stop, interrupt and banish them.

A great place to begin to interrupt and banish
those useless thought processes is to consider the language you use to describe them.

Begin now to notice how you have been describing your other negative emotions.

Instead of feeling, ‘I feel sad’, describe for yourself what is really
going on: ‘I choose to think in a certain way that results in my feeling ‘sad’ when I encounter a
certain set of circumstances.’

It may sound a bit hokey at first, but as you think about it, really think
about the meaning of that sentence, you will begin to gain a sense of how truly liberating this is.

By changing your language you change your life.

The language you use to describe what you are feeling impacts that feeling tremendously, and it is
your knowledge, your awareness of these processes that gives you power over them.

Just like when
somebody says, “I’m depressed”. What they’ve done here is built that notion into their very being.
Nobody can be depressed all the time.

Instead, people who consider themselves depressed should be saying, “I
run a process through my mind that causes me to experience certain pictures, sounds, and feelings
inside that I have collectively labeled as depression.” The same goes for anxiety.

Now, after taking control of these processes, put a good emotion in place of the negative emotion.

If you catch yourself running one of these negative processes, interrupt it! Inside your mind,
go FFFFFFFFTTTT....wait a minute....STOP! Make the sound inside your mind...DING...stop the
negative process. Start the resourceful process.

As you go through your day, become aware of what
you are seeing, hearing, and thinking inside yourself and realize that you have control.

Change your
physiology to have a confident state. Change your internal pictures, your internal voice to suit you.

Congratulate yourself when you stop the negative processes and praise yourself when you start a
confident process, because you get more of what you reinforce.

raising yourself gives you
incentive to run the resourceful process. Naturally, you’ll then be more likely to do it again in the
future. After all, you should treat yourself well.


Some people have negative internal voices nagging
at them all day. How awful would it be to live like that? Remember, the only person who you spend
all your time with is yourself. You may as well have great rapport with yourself.

Compliment
yourself. Praise Yourself. Just do it.

When you do something well, congratulate yourself.
Similarly, do that whenever you step outside your comfort zone. Celebrate those successes and
reward yourself accordingly!

The past is the past. There’s nothing we can
really do about it now, the best thing we can do is learn from it and behave differently in the future.

To that extent, I want to forgive yourself, your former self for being shy and not acting confident in
the past.

So often people spend their valuable time and energy kicking themselves for time and
opportunities they lost as a consequence of being shy.

if you were unconfident in the past, if you were shy or whatever, forgive yourself now

Release all
those feelings of negativity or any frustration or anything bad you might have toward being shy in
the past, because that is a thing of the past.

There are four different levels of competence that people go through as they develop any skill.
Those four levels are: unconscious incompetence, conscious incompetence, conscious competence,
and unconscious competence.

Unconscious incompetence means that we do not possess a skill nor are we even aware how useful
that skill could be to us.

When I was in college, I finally looked around and realized just how shy I was and that other people
were actually confident, I moved to the second level of skill development which is that of conscious
incompetence. I became aware of just how shy I was.

When we become aware of something
lacking in our lives, that is a great opportunity since it means we get a chance to improve our lives. 

Conscious competence is where you can apply a skill and yet you have to consciously think about
applying the skill. The skill is not yet a habit for you.

The fourth level of skill development is entitled unconscious competence. This is the ultimate stage
of any skill. Unconscious competence is where a skill has been ingrained as a habit. You no longer
have to spend your time thinking about applying the skill.

People who are masters at what they do function at the level of unconscious competence.

D edicate yourself to the good you deserve and desire for yourself. Give yourself peace of mind.
You deserve to be happy. You deserve delight. – Mark Victor HansenNot only does language reflect a person’s thinking, it also reinforces a person’s thinking.

Chapter 2: Speaking The Language of Confidence

The Vocabulary Of Confidence:
By changing your language you change your life. – Kent Sayre

Most people
speak language unconsciously which means they don’t give it a lot of purposeful thought. As such,
these habitual language patterns reflect a person’s thinking, be it confident thinking or the lack
thereof

Not only does language reflect a person’s thinking, it also reinforces a person’s thinking.

When you change your language, you will reinforce new ways of thinking and begin to see a new
perspective. As you do this, more options will become available to you while you naturally find
yourself more confident.

The key here is to integrate the following information into your everyday
vocabulary.

There are two sets of words. There’s a set of words that you
need to integrate into your vocabulary in order for you to be the most confident person that you
possibly can. And there is a set of words that you need to absolutely eliminate from your vocabulary
in order to help you get where you’re going.

The Confidence Killers:

First, we’ll tackle the set of words to eliminate and completely remove them from our vocabulary. If
you catch yourself using these words, say, “Hey, wait a minute. That was symptomatic of my old,
shy self. And I’m no longer shy. I’m behaving confidently and therefore, I have confidence. I’m
going to use a different word”.

Don’t beat yourself up over it. Just acknowledge that you use the
word, eliminate it from your vocabulary next time and go forth.

Try:
The first word is try.

There’s a difference
between trying to do something and doing something.

Quite simply, trying is lying.

Eliminate the word try. Instead use the word ‘do’. 	

Don’t try to eliminate the word try, do it.

The Shy Sentence: I’ll try to do the laundry tomorrow.
The Confident Sentence: I will do the laundry tomorrow.

Hope:
Another word that is not a word of confident people is “hope”.

‘hope’ presupposes a lack of action.

Contrast this with, “I’m going to take action and I’m going to make it happen.” “I’m going to make
my situation better”.

Hoping for
something to happen is being reactive, whereas you are proactive when you take action and expect success.

Eliminate the notion, “I hope that this could happen”. Think, if yourself using the word hope, stop
yourself and say, “Now what specific action could I take in order to make that happen or to
maximize the likelihood of that happening?”

The Shy Sentence: I hope I can take a trip to Hawaii someday.
The Confident Sentence: I am making plans to take a trip to Hawaii next month.

But:
But negates everything in the sentence that precedes it.

When
someone hears the word but, they immediately know that what was previously said should be
disregarded.

But always
negates so be aware of how you’re using it if you do use it.

If you want to communicate the same thing without using the word ‘but’, substitute these words,
‘and yet’.

The Shy Sentence: I want to go but I have something else going on.
The Confident Sentence: I want to go and yet I have something else going on

The Three “oods”: Would, Could, and Should :

The three ‘oods’ that are no good.

Would makes something conditional. It’s not confident. It’s not absolute.

Well, would
is conditional and presupposes there’s something or some condition that’s stopping you.

So it’s
pointless to use the word would. Eliminate that word from your vocabulary.

The Shy Sentence: I would talk to that stranger now if only...
The Confident Sentence: I will talk to that stranger now.

‘Could’ is the next ‘ood’ that we will eliminate.

Using what’s known as the conditional tense of the
word could implies that there is a condition attached to your action.

Could presupposes that there’s some condition that’s
stopping you. It’s unnecessary.

Eliminate it from your vocabulary. Preferably use phrases like, “I
can, I will, I do.”

The Shy Sentence: I could try making a speech in front of my peers.
The Confident Sentence: I can make a speech in front of my peers.

Should is the worst of the ‘oods’

Should implies that there’s some sort of expectations projected
onto you and that you lack a choice in how you want to behave.

Think of the sentence, “I should be
doing this right now.” Well, you should be doing this according to whom? Ask yourself that,
according to whom? Whose expectations?

It’s all about your own expectations, your own internal
frame of reference. After all, you’re running your brain, you’re leading your own life. You’re a
unique, divine individual in charge of what you’re doing.

So, saying should is like keeping yourself
hostage by limiting your choices.

If you have a preconceived notion that you should do something
all the time in a certain circumstance, then you’re not going to investigate other options because
you’re just going to do what you “should do”.

And that’s a limiting perspective because whenever
you have fewer choices, you’re less empowered and have less control over your life.

The Shy Sentence: It’s late and I should get home now.
The Confident Sentence: It’s late and I choose to go home now.

Attempt:
This word is similar to try.

the difference between doing
something and attempting something is vast.

So again, consider your goals: you’re going to go for them and
you’re going to achieve them. You are going to do this. You’re not going to “attempt” to do this or
that, you’re going to go for it and you’re going to do it.

If you catch yourself using the word attempt,
that’s fine. Simply switch your language and repeat the same phrase with the words, “I’m going to
do this.”

Instead of saying, “I’m going to attempt this goal”, say “I’m going to go after this goal, I’m
going to achieve this goal, I’m going to accomplish this goal, I’m going to make this happen.”

The Shy Sentence: I’m going to attempt to water-ski this afternoon at the lake.
The Confident Sentence: I’m going to water-ski this afternoon at the lake.

Wish:
The final word for you to eliminate to complete the first phase of building your vocabulary of
confidence is “wish”

Think of the
associations the word “wish” creates in you: throwing a penny into some magic fountain and 
hoping
that your wish will come true. And we already talked about what hope is.

So just by wishing, it’s as
if you’re not willing to take action and will it to happen, to do whatever it takes to accomplish what it
is you want so you can lead the life of your dreams. So eliminate the word wish from your
vocabulary.

The Shy Sentence: I wish that I’d win a million dollars.
The Confident Sentence: I want a million dollars and I’m taking specific, repeated, massive action
to work my plan and get that million dollars.

The Confidence Builders:



