When the number of options bought in a spread differs from the number of options sold, it is called a ratio spread.

A ratio spread can be viewed as a variation of an existing option strategy, where additional options in one leg are bought or sold to create an unbalanced spread.

In essence, an unbalanced-spread strategy is simply a spread in which there is a difference between the number of options in one leg (or side) versus the number in another leg (or side).

There can be a large number of variations in unbalanced spreads, so each should be analyzed separately to determine the risks and rewards associated with each unique spread.

An unbalanced (ratio) spread is defined broadly as any option strategy in which the number of options bought is different than the number sold

The trader, for example, can use an unbalanced ratio of two-for-one, three-for-one, three-for-two, and so on

An unbalanced-spread strategy in which more options are sold than bought is commonly called a ratio spread, or front spread.

An unbalanced spread strategy in which more options are bought than sold is called a backspread (sell one 100 call and buy two 105 calls).

In a backspread, the short options are farther out-of-the-money.

For this chapter, just remember that in a ratio spread (front spread), the option closest to the stock price is typically bought, and in a backspread, the option furthest from the stock price is typically bought

An unbalanced spread strategy (front spread or backspread) can be constructed with either all calls or all puts, or a combination of both; for example, an unbalanced call spread can consist of buying one close-to-the-money call and selling two calls at a higher strike price, or selling one close-to-the-money call and buying two calls at a higher strike price.

An unbalanced put spread can consist of buying one close-to-the-money put and selling two puts at a lower strike price, or selling one close-to-the-money put and buying two puts at a lower strike price.

It is not uncommon to establish an unequal number of long positions versus short positions because it enables you to tailor your account to your unique prediction of the market.

A ratio spread (front spread) can, for instructional purposes, be viewed as two option transactions.
     The first part is a vertical debit spread, in which one option is purchased at one strike price and another option is sold further out-of-the-money (with the same expiration date), creating a net debit.
     The second part of the transaction is the sale of an additional naked short option at the same strike price (and expiration date) as the other short option.

Another way to view a ratio spread is that you buy one option and finance the purchase (in whole or in part) by selling two or more further out-of-the money options.

The sale of options, in effect, can reduce the cost of the long option and can convert the transaction from a debit to a credit or zero cost.

To execute a ratio spread, you can, for example, purchase an at-the-money option and sell two out-of-the-money options. Alternatively, you can buy an out-of-the-money option at one strike price and sell two further out-of-the-money options.

If a call ratio spread is executed for a debit, you will lose the entire amount of the debit if the price of the stock closes at or below the strike price of the long call at expiration. If a call ratio spread is executed for a credit, you will gain the entire amount of the credit if the price of the stock closes at or below the strike price of the long call at expiration.

The maximum profit potential of such a call ratio spread, at expiration, is the difference between the two strike prices times $100 (assuming it is a stock) times the number of long contracts minus any net debit paid (or plus any credit) and is realized when the price of the stock closes at the strike price of the short calls.

At the short option strike price, you profit as much as you can from the long option before the negative effects of the short options kick in.

The ratio spreader has unlimited risk on the upside in the case of a call ratio spread and unlimited risk on the downside in the case of a put ratio spread because of the excess short options.

Losses for a ratio spreader continue to rise, at expiration, the more the short options finish in-the-money.

A ratio spread has two break-even points, and the level of these points is a little more complicated than usual because a different number of long versus short options is involved. One break-even point, at expiration, is where the underlying stock equals the long call option strike price plus the net debit, and the second break-even point is where the excess short option value equals the profit achieved at the short strike price.

For an unbalanced spread, it is difficult to generalize about time decay and volatility because they are affected by the ratio chosen, strike prices, and other factors.

If the ratio spread is executed for a debit, the full net premium must be paid at the time of purchase.

A ratio spread requires margin in a taxable account. A ratio call spread may not be permitted in an IRA because it involves short naked call options.

A ratio put spread works the same way but in the opposite direction.

((In call ratio spread))If the stock price closes between the strike prices of the two option positions at expiration, your long call will be in-the-money and your short calls will be out-of-the-money. If the short options expire in-the-money, they may be assigned, but you are not fully protected by the long call.

A call ratio spread may be an appropriate strategy if you forecast that an underlying stock will rise but not beyond the short strike price.

If the underlying stock surges, a call ratio spread has unlimited risk potential because there are more short contracts.

If the stock plunges, all options expire worthless, and you profit if the position was executed for a credit but lose if it was executed for a debit.

A typical call ratio spread is moderately bullish and has limited profit potential and unlimited risk.

A put ratio spread (front spread) is similar to a call ratio spread, except that it is executed with puts.

 If the underlying stock plunges, a ratio spread has unlimited risk because there are more short contracts. If the stock surges, all options expire worthless, and you profit if the position was executed for a credit but lose if it was executed for a debit.

For instructional purposes, a backspread can be viewed as two option transactions.
    The first part is a vertical credit spread, in which one option is sold at one strike price and another option is purchased further out-of-the-money (with the same expiration date), creating a net credit.
    The second part of the transaction is the purchase of an additional long option at the same strike price (and expiration date) as the other long option.

The purchase of options, in effect, reduces the net credit and can even convert the transaction from a credit to a debit or zero cost.

To execute a backspread, for example, you can sell an at-the-money call option and buy two out-of-the-money options. Alternatively, you can sell an out-of-the-money option at one strike price and buy two further out-of-the-money options.

If a call backspread is executed for a credit, you will gain the entire amount of the credit if the price of the stock closes at or below the strike price of the short call at expiration. If a call backspread is executed for a debit, you will lose the entire amount of the debit if the price of the stock closes at or below the strike price of the short call at expiration.

A backspread assumes the opposite risk of a ratio spread. As a result, a backspread has unlimited profit potential on the upside in the case of a call and unlimited profit potential on the downside in the case of a put because of the excess long options.

 Gains for a backspread continue to rise, at expiration, the more the long options finish in-the-money.

The maximum loss of such a call backspread, at expiration, is the difference between the two strike prices times $100 (assuming it is a stock) times the number of short contracts minus any net credit (or plus any debit) and is realized when the price of the stock closes at the strike price of the long calls.

At the long option strike price, you lose as much as you can from the short option before the positive effects of the long options kick in.

A backspread has two break-even points. One break-even point, at expiration, is when the underlying stock equals the short option strike price plus the net credit (or minus the net debit), and the second break-even point is when the excess long option value equals the loss achieved at the long strike price.

For an unbalanced spread, it is difficult to generalize about time decay and volatility because they are affected by the ratio chosen, strike prices, and other factors. If the backspread is executed for a debit, the full net premium must be paid at the time of purchase. A backspread requires margin in a taxable account for the net short position.

A backspread may be permitted in an IRA because there are no naked options.

A put backspread works the same way but in the opposite direction.

A call backspread may be an appropriate strategy if you forecast that an underlying stock will rise beyond the long strike price.

If the underlying stock surges, a call backspread has unlimited risk potential because there are more long contracts. If the stock plunges, all options expire worthless, and you profit if the position was executed for a credit but lose if it was executed for a debit.

A put backspread is similar to a call backspread, except it is executed with puts. If the underlying stock plunges, a backspread has unlimited reward potential because there are more long contracts. If the stock surges, all options expire worthless, and you profit if the position was executed for a credit but lose if it was executed for a debit.

In a call or put ratio (front) spread, margin is generally required on the short options if uncovered

In a call or put backspread, margin is generally required for the short vertical portion of the spread

Margin on a vertical credit spread is generally calculated as the lesser of the short option margin or the difference between the strike prices minus the premium collected.

An unbalanced strategy can encompass a broad range of spread strategies, so it can be difficult to generalize how each spread will react. For example, in a vertical spread, a ratio spread or backspread can be executed for a debit or a credit, depending on the number of options bought versus sold and the relative values of options bought versus sold. Such relative values are affected by the width of strike prices and time remaining to expiration.

As a general rule, a ratio (front) spread with a low ratio, wider strike prices, and shorter time to expiration will more likely be executed at a debit. A ratio (front) spread with a high ratio, narrower strike prices, and longer time to expiration will more likely be executed at a credit.

Likewise, as a general rule, a backspread with a high ratio, narrower strike prices, and longer time to expiration will more likely be executed at a debit. A backspread with a low ratio, wider strike prices, and shorter time to expiration will more likely be executed at a credit.

An unbalanced spread is a strategy within a strategy. An unbalanced strategy can be applied to any spread strategy, so you can fine-tune your risk-reward parameters.

Keep in mind that you have unlimited profit potential if the number of long options is greater and unlimited risk if the number of short options is greater.

The terminology in the options industry regarding unbalanced spreads can sometimes be confusing: Option strategies come in all different sizes and shapes, and an unbalanced spread can be viewed as a strategy that captures many strategies that would not be defined otherwise. You should learn the terminology used by your trading platform so that you can trade effectively.

A ratio (front) spread can be considered a type of hedge but, in this case, you are hedging the high cost of the long option by offsetting all or a portion of its cost with the sale of other options.

 In an unbalanced spread, you have offsetting deltas and other Greeks, and you get to choose the distance between strike prices, the number of options bought versus sold, whether the transaction is for a debit or a credit, how far options are out-of-the-money, and the time to expiration.







