A long call condor spread consists of purchasing one call at a lower strike, selling two calls at middle strikes, and purchasing one call at a higher strike.

In a condor, the outside strikes are referred to as the wings and the two short options located at the middle strikes are referred to as the body.

A condor is a limited-risk/limited-reward strategy in which you can take advantage of a range-bound market (long condor) or an increase in volatility (short condor), with a relatively low margin requirement.

A condor spread is a four-legged option spread consisting of all calls or all puts in which each leg has the same expiration date but different strike prices.

All four options have equally spaced exercise prices and expire at the same time.

A long condor spread is a strategy designed to profit from a trading range, with limited risk. A short condor spread is a strategy designed to profit from volatility, with limited risk.

A condor is similar to a butterfly, covered in Chapter 15, except that a condor has two middle exercise prices instead of one.

You can use the long condor strategy when you project that a particular stock will remain within a trading range (neutral) and you want low volatility, limited risk, and relatively low margin.

A long condor achieves its maximum value at expiration when the underlying stock is at or between the inside exercise prices.

In a long condor, two outside exercise prices are purchased and two inside exercise prices are sold (four total contracts).

When you buy a condor, you typically pay a net debit, which is your maximum loss

A long call condor can be viewed as a combination of a bull call spread (the lower two strikes) and a bear call spread (the upper two strikes).

In a short condor, two outside exercise prices are sold and two inside exercise prices are purchased (also four total contracts).

When you sell a condor, you receive a net credit, which is your maximum gain.

You can consider executing a short condor if you believe that a stock will trade outside a range (outside the middle strike prices).

A short call condor can be viewed as a combination of a bear call spread (the lower two strikes) and a bull call spread (the upper two strikes).

A short condor spread can be a way to profit from a volatile market.

A condor has many of the same risk-reward characteristics of a butterfly, but a condor usually has a higher debit (or credit) because the middle strike of a butterfly is split into two to create a condor.

A long condor is considered a long position because the lowest strike price (assuming calls are used) is long. A short condor is considered a short position because the lowest strike price (assuming calls are used) is short.

In other words, the lowest and highest strike prices in a long condor are long legs, whereas the lowest and highest strike prices in a short condor are short legs.

In a condor, margin is generally required for the short vertical portion of the spread.

Full payment is required if the spread is a long condor.

You can execute a long or short condor with calls or puts

A condor (at expiration) will have a value somewhere between zero and the amount between exercise prices (five points, in this example).

A call condor, at expiration, has a value of zero when the stock is at or below the lowest strike price (e.g., 95), achieves its maximum value when the stock is at or between the middle strike prices (e.g., 100 and 105), and declines to zero when the stock is at or above the highest strike price (e.g., 110).

The break-even points in a condor occur when the stock (at expiration) is at the lowest strike price plus the debit or credit or at the highest strike price minus the debit or credit (ignoring commissions).

A condor is executed for a debit or a credit, and its amount depends on the width of strike prices, time remaining to expiration, the relative value of the options that are bought and sold, and the bid/ask spread.

As a general rule, a wider strike price means a larger debit (if long) or credit (if short), whereas a wider bid/ask spread increases a debit (if long) and decreases a credit (if short)

An attraction of a condor is that it has low volatility because there are two long options and two short options that tend to offset one another.

In a condor, time decay of short options typically approximates time decay of long options, and a volatility increase or decrease affects the value of short options by approximately the same amount as long options

A long condor is similar to a long butterfly, except that a long condor has two middle exercise prices.

In a long call condor, you sell one option at each of the middle exercise prices and, at the same time, you buy an option at a lower strike price and buy an option at a higher strike price, where the distance between strike prices is equal.

A long condor (at expiration) will have a value somewhere between the width of the exercise prices and zero

A long condor is a strategy that has limited profit potential and limited risk and is profitable if the underlying stock trades within the range of strike prices.

A long call condor maximum profit occurs when the stock is at or between the middle strike prices at expiration, and its maximum loss occurs (at expiration) if the stock closes at or below the lowest strike price or at or about the highest strike price.

The maximum loss is the debit paid (plus commissions).

The break-even points in a long condor occur when the stock (at expiration) is at the lowest strike price plus the debit or at the highest strike price minus the debit.

In a long condor, the time decay of short options typically approximates the time decay of long options, and a volatility increase or decrease affects the value of short options by approximately the same amount as long options.

For a long condor, a debit is charged to your account and must be paid in full. A long call condor may be permitted in an IRA.

The maximum payoff is achieved when XYZ stock finishes at or between the middle exercise prices and loses value as the stock price moves above the higher middle strike price or below the lower middle strike price.

In a long put condor, you sell one option at each of the middle exercise prices and, at the same time, you buy an option at a lower strike price and buy an option at a higher strike price, where the distance between strike prices is equal.

A long condor (at expiration) will have a value somewhere between the width of the exercise prices and zero.

A long condor is a strategy that has limited profit potential and limited risk and is profitable if the underlying stock trades within the range of strike prices.

A long condor is similar to a long butterfly, except that a long condor has two middle exercise prices.

A long call condor maximum profit occurs when the stock is at or between the middle strike prices at expiration, and its maximum loss occurs (at expiration) if the stock closes at or below the lowest strike price or at or about the highest strike price. The maximum loss is the debit paid (plus commissions).

The break-even points in a long condor occur when the stock (at expiration) is at the lowest strike price plus the debit or at the highest strike price minus the debit.

In a long condor, the time decay of short options typically approximates the time decay of long options, and a volatility increase or decrease affects the value of the short options by approximately the same amount as long options.

For a long condor, a debit charged to your account must be paid in full. A long call condor may be permitted in an IRA.

The maximum payoff is achieved when XYZ stock finishes at or between the middle exercise prices and loses value as the stock price moves above the higher middle strike price or below the lower middle strike price.

In a short call condor, you buy one option at each of the middle exercise prices and, at the same time, you sell an option at a lower strike price and sell an option at a higher strike price, where the distance between strike prices is equal.

A short condor (at expiration) will have a value somewhere between the width of the exercise prices and zero.

A short condor is a strategy that has limited profit potential and limited risk and is profitable if the underlying stock trades outside the range of strike prices.

A short condor is similar to a short butterfly, except that a short condor has two middle exercise prices.

A short call condor maximum gain occurs (at expiration) if the stock closes at or below the lowest strike price or at or about the highest strike price.

The maximum gain is the debit paid (plus commissions). Its maximum loss occurs when the stock is at or between the middle strike prices at expiration.

The break-even points in a short condor occur when the stock (at expiration) is at the lower strike price plus the credit or at the highest strike price minus the credit.

In a short condor, the time decay of short options typically approximates the time decay of long options, and a volatility increase or decrease affects the value of short options by approximately the same amount as long options.

In a short condor, margin is generally required for the short vertical portion of the spread. A short call condor may be permitted in an IRA.

Can exercise long option if in-the-money; may be assigned on short option if in-the-money.

The maximum loss occurs when XYZ stock finishes at or between the middle exercise prices and the trade gains value as the stock price moves above the higher middle strike price or below the lower middle strike price.

In a short put condor, you buy one option at each of the middle exercise prices and, at the same time, you sell an option at a lower strike price and sell an option at a higher strike price, where the distance between strike prices is equal.

Like a long butterfly, you may want to use a long condor strategy when you forecast that a particular stock will remain within a trading range (neutral) and you want low volatility in your account and limited risk.

You may want to use a short condor strategy when you project that a particular stock will trade outside a trading range and you want low volatility, limited risk, and low margin.

The most important decision is the selection of the middle strike prices because that determines where you incur your maximum gain if you are long and your maximum loss if you are short.

You should keep in mind that the middle strike prices do not have to be near at-the-money when they are established;

You can use your trading platform to determine whether there is more favorable pricing using a call versus a put condor under various scenarios.

If you are nearing expiration, you can offset your current position, because there are only a few days left in the option expiration cycle, and establish a similar position in the subsequent expiration month.

It may be difficult, however, to roll a condor because there are four contracts involved.

There is assignment risk associated with a condor spread. Although it is generally accepted that spread trading reduces the risk of loss, spreads are subject to early exercise or assignment that can remove the very protection that you wanted. This can lead to margin calls and/or greater losses than anticipated.

As a general rule, it is best to avoid assignment on any leg in a condor, or any other short option position, for that matter. An alternative to being assigned is to offset a short option in the marketplace.

You need to be careful not to be assigned in a condor spread because it can create margin problems and unnecessary complexity.

In a long call condor spread, for example, its maximum loss occurs (at expiration) if the stock closes at or below the lowest strike price or at or about the highest strike price. This may sound like equal results, but the close above the highest strike price has exercise/assignment risk. The close below the lowest strike price simply results in all options expiring worthless.

The potentially high cost of commissions and the bid/ask spread should be taken into consideration before entering into a condor.

Commissions are incurred to establish each condor leg, to offset the condor if you choose to do so, and to execute any exercise and assignment.

As a result, commissions, including the bid/ask spread, may be incurred on the four contracts to establish the condor and possibly on an additional four contracts to offset those positions at a later date, for a total of eight commission transactions.

Additional commissions would be incurred on exercise or assignment. Like a butterfly, sometimes I believe that they call it a condor because you pay so much in commissions that you will see your profits fly away.

A ladder (also referred to as a Christmas tree) is a term that can describe a variety of spreads. A ladder usually consists of three different exercise prices, where all options are the same type and expire at the same time.

 In a long (bull) call ladder, one call is purchased at the lowest strike price, and one call is sold at each of the higher strike prices. It is similar to a long call condor, except that there is no purchase of a call at a higher strike price.

 In a long (bull) put ladder, one put is purchased at the highest exercise price, and one put is sold at each of the lower exercise prices. It is similar to a long put condor, except that there is no purchase of a put at a lower strike price.

 A ladder can be considered a particular type of unbalanced (ratio) spread.

 A long ladder has unlimited risk and a short ladder has unlimited profit potential.

 In a short (bear) call ladder, one call is sold at the lowest strike price and one call is purchased at each of the higher exercise prices. It is similar to a short call condor except that there is no sale of a call at a higher strike price.

 In a short (bear) put ladder, one put is sold at the highest exercise price and one put is sold at each of the lower exercise prices. It is similar to a short put condor, except that there is no sale of a put at a lower strike price.

 A trader may choose a long condor over a short straddle in a sideways market because of the limited risk of the condor.

 Unlike a short straddle or short strangle, in a long-condor strategy, if the stock moves appreciably in one direction or the other, your losses are limited.

 In a long condor, the most you can lose is the amount paid to purchase the condor, but a short straddle or strangle has greater profit potential.

 A straddle or strangle can be used to profit from a range or to profit from volatility, but the problem with a straddle or strangle is that there can be a lot of risk. A condor is designed to mitigate such risk.

